                The Joy of Screeeech!!!-Thud Cooking

        _Spy_'s Holiday Guide to Politically Correct Meat-Eating,
                        the Roadkill Way

                                by Tony Hendra

[Typed in by Doug Orleans, sans all the silly Fronch carets and thingies]

"The right equipment and the freshest food refine a family tradition."
                                                        -- Martha Stewart

Your Volvo 740 GL Wagon is automotively correct.  You get your news from
_Mac Neil/Lehrer_.  You have compassion for the homeless but feel it's time
to get tough on taxes.  The jingoism of the Gulf War gave you pause, but
you've decided that for the nation as a whole it was cleansing. You refer to
the poor as "income-impaired" and to criminals as "morally challenged" and
no longer squint slightly when using the term "African American".  While
Meryl Streep's ghastly attempts at foreign accents grate on you like
fingernails on a blackboard, you nonetheless feel she is an enormously
talented actress.  And culinarily, you have been correct for at least a
decade.

Early in the eighties, you embraced ethnic cuisines from regions like
Calabria, the Deccan and Ethiopia, whose native populations themselves had
no food; you believed that in some obscure way they would benefit from your
enthusiasm for baghari jhinga or tibs wot.  A little later you discovered
the pleasures of baby vegetables.  You relished the thought that at a time
when we had the oldest president ever, we were eating the youngest
vegetables.  It's been years now since you ordered a pizza with tomato and
extra cheese: your taste in toppings runs more to shrimp-scallop boudin a
l'estragon and sauteed radicchio.  You feel quiet, patriotic pride over the
fact that Californian cabs and zins are routinely being ordered in
three-star restaurants in Lyons (by Frenchmen!), and over the spectacular
rise of American regional cooking.  In a way you have come full circle,
since you're sure the Native Americans---who subsist largely on Wonder bread
and Thunderbird---are somehow bucked up by your consumption of corn-cactus
pudding with chipotle-chile bechamel.

But all this carefully and lovingly assembled correctness can evaporate as
fast as Julia's love for Kiefer with the mention of one tiny word: _meat_.

Thanks to the efforts of animal-rights groups like PETA and assorted herds
of New Age nutritionists, the cultural status of meat-eating is currently on
par with that of drunk driving and headed down toward pedophilia.  Even in
restaurants that offer dead animals on the menu, ordering one can cause the
waitron to look at you as if you'd just tried to tell the one about the
three gay guys in a hot tub.

And there is no appealing to reason here.  Minds have been made up, another
pillar added to the portico of conventional wisdom.  It's pointless to argue
that the animal-rights movement stems from an _ignorance_ of animals, that
it's the Disneyfication of nature; that thinking that animals are capable of
human emotion because they have big, cute eyes isn't progressive but
infantile; that the unpronounceable tag _speciesism_ is sophistic, since
every species on the planet survives by eating other species; that one's
passion might be better directed to the 6 million American children who go
to bed hungry than to the dying thought of Frank Perdue's chickens.  And if
you do present these arguments, there'll be no getting back in anyone's good
graces---it's be bootless to whine, as a once-adoring group backs away in
disgusted silence, that you really like the music of k.d.lang.

You are a carnivore---a mad, rabid pariah feeding off the carrion of your
innocent fellow travelers on Spaceship Earth.

Take heart: an answer to your problem lies no farther away than that Volvo.
Cars provide us with a carnucopia [sic] of fresh, free-range, nonhormoned
game.  Meat any caring carnivore can bring to the table with an unblemished
conscience.  Meat, moreover, from which no slaughterhouse, packager or other
culinarily incorrect middleman has made a penny.  Known to the French as
_nourriture de la route_---or, more coloquially, _la bouffe morte_---
roadkill has long been recognized as a hearty addition to French country
cooking.  In many rural regions of the U.S. as well, it has been a mainstay
of traditional local cuisines for as long as there have been beer coolers in
pickup trucks.

The possibilities of sophisticated roadkill cooking are almost unlimited.
There is absolutely no reason why the imprint of a snow tire (or a deeply
embedded hood ornament) need mar the flavor of sumptuous Venaison de la
Route Roti; likewise, caring, loving cooking and a pair of pliers make the
classic English dish Pheasant Under Broken Glass a memorable triumph.  The
recipe for Terrine de Groundhog that appears to the right [below.. ed] is
just one of several fr small-mammal pate.  and a fitting hors d'eouvre it
can be for hearty Civet de Possum, Navarin de Chipmunk, Beaver en Papillote
or Rack of Raccoon, which is also described here.

SIDEBAR: The Rights of Vegetables

A growing number of rights activists are questioning whether there is any
substantial difference between electrocuting a veal calf and, say, tearing
an ear of corn from its parent, stripping it naked and plunging it into
boiling water.  Why, they ask, should prunes die to keep us regular?  A peach
may not have a face, but it certainly has skin, flesh and a mother.  And
given the inclusive quasi-Buddhist definitions of life used by organizations
like PETA, it's even possible that the peach was once your Aunt Helen.

The Roadkill Gourmet is not competent to judge the merits of these
contentions but has avoided vegetable side dishes while the jury is still
out.  The wines suggested here, however, have been suggested with an eye to
processes that cause the grapes the least pain---for example, wines made
from "the noble rot" (grapes left to decompose on the vine prior to
picking), or those made from the free-run technique (rather than the
grapes' being mechanically crushed, their sheer weight in the vat produces
juice).  In both cases, carnivores and herbivores are relieved of moral
responsibility in the vinification process: in the first, the grapes are
already dead; in the second, they in effect kill one another.

SIDEBAR: They Can't Run but They Can Be Hide

A tremendous bonus for the Roadkill Gourmet is that he or she simultaneously
acquires fur that can be worn with an entirely clear conscience.  Removing
the skin from its host is not always necessary: often a traffic-related
impact has already separated the flesh from its natural covering.  Where
this has only partially occurred, the fur can usually be peeled from small
mammals in much the same way one peels the skin from a mango.  These strips
or squares should be stretched on a piece of plywood for several days until
dry, after which they can be sewn together to make garments.  The table
below gives the number of possum skins needed to make common articles of
roadkill couture:

        MEN'S JACKET.......40 possums
        WOMEN'S JACKET.....30 possums
        MINISKIRT..........6-11 possums
        BEANIE.............1/2 possum

RECIPE: Terrine de Groundhog

Serves 6

The universal question with any pate orterrine is, _how much fat_?  The
caring carnivore faces an additional problem: what _kind_ of fat?  The
traditional resource, pork fat, is an obvious no-no, given that
traffic-related deaths among pigs are, alas, practically nil.

Groundhogs are not, of course, hogs, but they are fatty.  One solution,
therefore, is to add a groundhog or two to your recipe, in order to achieve
a 2:1 meat-to-fat ratio.  An average-size groundhog will yield about 1 1/2
pounds of meat, allowing for impact-related detritus; an extra groundhog in
similar condition will yield about 3/4 pound of fat.  Voila!  You're in
business with a hearty Thanksgiving treat, _plus_ you have a generous
portion of meat left over for a groundhog bolognese sauce or Swedish
groundhogballs.

1 1/2 lb groundhog
1/4 lb groundhog fat
2 tbsp salt
1 tsp pepper
1 tbsp "quatre epices" (e.g., allspice, clove, nutmeg, thyme, blended
  according to taste)
1 clove garlic, pureed
2-3 tbsp Armagnac

Preheat oven to 325 F.  Divide the meat into rough thirds.  Grind two thirds
smoothly and coarsely chop the other third.  Coarse-chop the fat.  Combine
all ingredients in a large bowl; mix thoroughly.  Place mixture in the
center of a large, heavy sheet of aluminum foil.  As a tribute to the
animals, shape the mixture into a reclining groundhog.  Cover tightly with
ends of foil and bake on a large cookie sheet for 2 hours.  Allow to cool
for several hours, garnish with woodland mushrooms, crabapples and wild
lettuce, and serve.

SUGGESTED WINES

Suncrest 1990 Muller Thrugaw (Washington State).  As the black label says,
this is a wine "as natural as the food you eat".  Made from the free-run
juice of organic grapes.  A perfect mate for natural food, such as Terrine
de Groundhog.

NV Colorado Cellars Cherry Wine.  Made from a mixture of hand-picked and
wind-dropped cherries, this is certifiably the most cruelty-free wine made
in North America.  A perfect sweet-and-sour foil for the groundhog's
naturally fatty meat.

Side picture captions: 

Country roadsides often make for the best autumn harvesting.

Needle-nose plies will help with precision gravel extraction.

When "carving", remove the "head" and "limbs" in one swift, fluid motion.


RECIPE: Rack of Raccoon with Clack-and-White Sauce

Serves 4

Raccoon is a splendidly American alternative to such tepid Gallic game as
hare, combining the smoky muscularity of coyote with the succulence of
squirrel.  The ash-can bandido puts on a tux in this elegant recipe; he is
perfectly suited to this dish, since enough of the rib cage nearly always
survives a traffic-related incident.

Once you have found one reasonably whole raccoon, remove the rack from the
rib cage.  Chop remaining meat and bones into 3-inch sections.  (If this
comes to less than 2 lb, add a second, smaller raccoon.)

RACCOON STOCK

2 1/2--3 lb chopped raccoon (meat and bones)
1 onion stuck with two cloves
1 bay leaf
Bouquet garni
1 carrot, sliced
1 medium tomato, whole, unpeeled
Salt, pepper

Brown meat and bones in a roasting pan at 450 F.  Deglaze roasting pan.
Combine all ingredients in a large saucepan, cover with water, and simmer
for 3--4 hours.  This will produce a fine, gamy stock.  Stain, degrease and
reduce by 50 percent.  Set aside.

ROASTING THE RACK OF RACCOON

Unless you know a caring butcher, you must "French" the rack: remove all fat
on both sides of the bones and between them, except for a thin layer over
the eye meat.  Fold a double strip of foil over alternate ribs (this will
make some of the ribs scorch and leave the others white, for a pleasing
"coon-tail" effect).  Place 1/2 cup water in a roasting pan, and roast the
rack 10 minutes at 500 to sear, then another 20-25 minutes at 400.  Set
aside.

BLACK-PEPPERCORN SAUCE

1 1/2 tbsp butter
1 1/2 tbsp flour
1 1/2 cups reheated raccoon stock
1 tbsp coarsely ground black pepper
Soy sauce, to color

Use butter and flour to make roux (thickening agent).  Stir in stock.  Simmer
2 minutes or until thickened.  Add pepper.  Darken with dashes of soy sauce.

WHITE-PEPPERCORN SAUCE

1 1/2 cups dry white wine
1/2 cups coarsely chopped shallots
1 tbsp coarse white pepper
2/3 cup creme fraiche
1 egg yolk
Dash nutmeg

Combine the white wine, shallots and pepper.  Reduce and strain to achieve 2
tbsp liquid.  Whisk together creme fraiche and egg yolk.  Whisk in strained,
reduced liquid over a gentle heat until thickened.  Add nutmeg.

Plate sauces in half-moons, garnishing each side with its opposite
peppercorns (i.e., white peppercorns on black sauce and vice versa). Set two
raccoon ribs, playfully intertwined, along the "seam".

SUGGESTED WINES

1989 William Wheeler RS Reserve.  A rich and richly fruited dry red.  Made
from uncrushed grapes inoculated with yeast, then allowed to explode of
their own volition during fermentation.  A juicy partner for a juicy meat
like raccoon.

Inglenook 1985 Gewurztraminer Late Harvest.  A rich, smooth after-dinner
complement to raccoon.  Made from "noble rot" grapes, redolent of sun, earth
and the natural cycle of life and death.

Side picture captions:

The fewer flies circling your entree-to-be, the fresher it is.

Accoutrements shouldn't alter dish's appearance dramatically.

Un-Frenched ribs will over whelm the sauce's subtle flavor.



[Copied without permission from _Spy_ magazine, November 1991.]
